Debugging

What is Debugging?
    Debugging is the process of finding and fixing errors/bugs 
in your source code.
    A bug is a glitch in software that prevents a program from 
achieving the desired output (or being executed properly).

Types of Bugs
1. Syntax errors - These bugs violate the syntax rules of the
language. e.g. spelling errors, passing arguments where there 
are no arguments needed. They occur during the buildtime. 
Normally include misuse of functions, variables, or parameters.
These are normally underlined by the Intergrated Development 
Environment (IDE).

2. Logic errors - These are errors that occur when the process 
of solving the task at hand is not done properly.e.g an infinite
loop. The program works without errors but does not produce the 
expected results.

3. Design bugs - These are errors that originate in the design 
phase causing the program to do what it was designed to do but 
not the right thing to do. The equivalent of an architectural 
flaw affecting the building of a structure. It can be a mistake 
or malicious.

4. Runtime bugs - These occur when the application tries to perform
an operation that is not allowed. These are normally discovered
at the point of running the script or the program. e.g when you 
divide a number by zero, any calculation with a string.

Debugging vs Testing
    We debug to fix errors and test to look for vulnerabilities and 
make it better.

Debugging Cycle
Step 1 - Writing the code (coding).
Step 2 - Check if it's working.
Step 3 - If it's not working, you then debug.
Step 4 - If it's working, then you're done and you go back to step 1.

Bug Seeking Cycle
Step 1 - Coding.
Step 2 - Trying to break the code (testing).
Step 3 - If you suceed in breaking it, then you need to debug.
Step 4 - If you fail to break it, then you go back to step 1.

Tips/Principles for Debugging
1. Catch your bugs as early as possible.
- Only have one bug at a time.
- Test early and test often.
2. If a bug is not caught early, it gets harder to find because the 
details are not in your mind and you have a larger search space.
3. Pay attention to what you are writing or changing to find the bug.
4. Always work in small chunks of code.
5. If you're using github, always make small commits as opposed to 
large ones.
heroku

Assignment: Commit your python class to the repository on github.
Name repository 'pythontrack'.

Steps of Debugging
Step 1 - Plan your attack.
Step 2 - Back up your files.(version control/ github to keep track
of changes in my software)
Step 3 - Isolate the errornous block of code. Maybe by commenting 
it out.
Step 4 - Find the error. (the line(s) of code with the error)
Step 5 - Fix the error. Don't patch it.
Step 6 - Test the fix.
Step 7 - Look for similar bugs.

Other steps and strategies.

1. Reproducibility. The first step in being able to remove a 
bug is to be able to reproduce it. You need to understand what 
the cause and effect before you change the code.

2. Reduction. Finding the smallest or simplest test that exhibits 
the bug. Reduce the search space because bugs are not random.

3. Deduction. Understanding what the program is doing. Knowing 
the difference between the working input and non-working input.

4. Pair programming. Someone else may be able to see wrong 
assumptions or mistakes you may have made. Explaining code 
to others helps you to understand more what you are doing 
with the code.

5. Leveraging experience from others. Seeking solutions from 
more experienced programmers.

Preventive Measures.
=> Write clean and easy to read code. Don't repeat yourself 
/writing dry code and indent your code.
=> Write comments. It helps you figure out what your code is 
supposed to be doing.(part by part)
=> Make one change at a time. 
=> Test your code.
    1. Unit test. Test functional blocks of your code.
    2. Integration test. Test the interaction of those blocks.
    3. Test for valid and invalid data.
=> Defensive programming. You add error checking code and throwing 
exceptions.
=> Prioritizing which features can be implemented.
=> Incubating. Take a break if things are tough.
=> Brainstorm. Have brainstorming sessions.

Debugging tools.
1. Break points. They help you to see which part of the code 
is carrying the bug. 
2. Linting/Lints. 
3. Print statement.

Assignment: Research the other debugging tools.
Use a tool of choice and present tomorrow.

It is useful to use a print statement.